---
layout: post
title: "Coronacast - A lot of little kids are getting COVID. Why?"
categories: vaccination
author:
- Norman Swan
- Tegan Taylor
---



**Transcript**

**Tegan Taylor:** Hello, this is Coronacast, a daily podcast all about the coronavirus. I'm health reporter Tegan Taylor.

**Norman Swan:** And I'm physician and journalist Dr Norman Swan. It's Monday, 8 November, 2021.

**Tegan Taylor:** Norman, we've been saying since…well, we haven't been saying it, the experts have been saying it since early on in the pandemic, that luckily with Covid it is less likely for kids to catch it than adults and they are less likely to get sick from it than adults, which is a huge relief, you can imagine how much different the pandemic would have been if that hadn't been the case. And yet, when we are looking at case numbers, especially in Victoria at the moment, which is kind of the place in Australia where there is the most number of active cases going on, the biggest age group with active cases is actually kids under nine years old. It's a much bigger proportion of the active cases than that age group makes up in the whole population.

**Norman Swan:** And that's just a reflection of the fact that those kids are unimmunised and the virus will find people who are not vaccinated. If you look at New South Wales, it's not exactly comparable, but 25% of kids infected with Covid are 0 to 11, as of 23 October, 2021.

**Tegan Taylor:** And in other countries we are starting to see that they are looking at approving vaccinations in at least kids aged 5 and up, but how do these kids…I mean, active cases is one thing, how are they actually faring when they do catch Covid?

**Norman Swan:** Well, if you look at the proportion of cases, in other words people with COVID-19 who are in hospital, the 0- to 9-year-olds, and indeed the 10- to 19-year-olds are the lowest proportion compared to others. So if you actually average it out in the current outbreak it has been about 5% in that combined age group, compared to anything up to 65% if you are over 90. So it's small.And what they would say, at least in New South Wales, and I think to some extent it's true in Victoria, is that you can't really go on hospitalisations because some of those hospitalisations, the kids are not that unwell but they need to be in hospital for social reasons because their parents are sick and not able to look after them. But if you look at ICU admissions, they are tiny compared to the rest of the community, under 1% are in ICU. So that's under 1% of 0- to 19-year-olds not just 0- to 9-year-olds, compared to, say, 9% in people who are 70 to 79. So it's mild disease, by and large, when you get it.But interestingly for tonight's 7.30 I have interviewed a paediatric infectious disease expert from Nashville Tennessee, and if you remember rightly, they had a really bad surge. Their paediatric ICU was overwhelmed by kids with severe illness. It was just a matter of numbers. They didn't think that Delta was any more serious for kids than other forms of the virus, it was just that they had so many people unvaccinated, you had a lot of virus around and kids coming in. And that has tended to disappear.Their problem is that these kids are coming back, not just necessarily the ones who were in ICU but kids with mild to moderate disease, some of whom might not even have recognised that they had had…or their parents might not have recognised that they had had COVID-19 at all, an infection, and they are coming back with various severities of multisystem inflammatory disorder. In other words, they are getting inflammation throughout their bodies, and that includes myocarditis, which is a very rare condition in young kids, but they are getting myocarditis may be three, four, five weeks after their infection. So the hospitalisation doesn't necessarily reflect the true pattern in those kids. This is a rare disorder, but nonetheless it does occur, and that is another quite potent reason for getting immunised in that 5 to 11 age group.

**Tegan Taylor:** So myocarditis is that inflammation in and around the heart, which we've heard of as being a very rare side effect that seems to disproportionately affect young men who get the Pfizer vaccine. But if kids are being admitted a couple of weeks down the track with this multisystem organ inflammation disorder, are they counted as Covid cases? Like, if we are looking at the data, is that being captured there?

**Norman Swan:** I don't know the answer to that question, it's a good question, I don't know. It's more than a couple of weeks later, often it can be a month later or sometimes a little bit longer than that. So there is a time delay before it develops. And I don't know the answer to that.The message that some paediatricians are giving from Victoria is that they are not seeing a lot of that but it is rare, and I think that what you are getting from places like Nashville is just the numbers are so huge of kids who have caught Covid that they are seeing more of these than probably they are seeing in Victoria, simply by dint of numbers.I also asked Ritu Banerjee, who is an infectious disease expert, about the data from the Pfizer trial. Now, they didn't find any myocarditis in this trial, but it was 4,000 kids, and it would be much rarer than one in 4,000. But what she was saying was that if you actually look at the 12 years and above, the myocarditis tends to kick in, that risk tends to kick in at 17 or 18 and then goes into that young adulthood, there weren't many cases in the younger kids down to 12 that have been monitored in the immunisation rates so far, so that would bode very well for under-12-year-olds, that their rate of myocarditis with the vaccine is probably going to be very low indeed.

**Tegan Taylor:** And we're getting a lot of indications from the federal government that vaccines for younger kids are probably going to be approved in the near term. But we had this interesting question, Norman, and I'm not sure if you're going to be able to give me an answer because I haven't told you about this ahead of time, but someone has written in asking; are any of the rapid antigen tests approved for or suitable for young children? They said the one that they got from the supermarket says it's for adults and kids aged 13 years and over. Why would that be?

**Norman Swan:** I actually don't know the answer to that, it's probably the groups that they've tested it on. It's actually quite shocking if you look across medicine at drugs and their lack of testing in children, and a lot of drugs are given to children off-label. You don't realise that, they haven't been properly tested in children.And it's really interesting, asthma is an interesting example of where there has been clinical trials of anti-asthma drugs in children, but there have been some drugs that don't work in adults but probably do work in children and there haven't been the clinical trials to actually prove that, because asthma is a different disease in children.I just say that to illustrate the fact that when a lot of things are tested, they are not tested in children and they may work perfectly well. So it's really probably the studies they've done rather than they are not designed to pick up COVID-19 virus in children.

**Tegan Taylor:** Well, speaking of clinical trials, allow me to segue slightly, awkwardly, over to Pfizer has a new antiviral drugs that it has stopped its clinical trial early because it says that the data was so convincing that the drug was good that they wanted to move forward with seeking approval in the United States.

**Norman Swan:** Yes, so it's called Paxlovid. It's quite interesting, it's called a protease inhibitor, so it stops the viral replication, so it stops the RNA from replicating, and it's given, interestingly…so it's a new compound, and it's given, interestingly, along with an anti-HIV drug called Ritonavir. And the Ritonavir is not so much for its anti-COVID-19 effect, it's more that it slows down the body breaking down the active drug in the Paxlovid.And they gave it to 1,200 people in North and South America, Europe, Africa and Asia, about 45% from the United States, so it was 1,200 people, a randomised trial with placebo, started within five days, and people with mild to moderate symptoms. 89% reduction in hospitalisation, no deaths in the active group, and 10 deaths in the placebo group. So on the basis of that, their data monitoring committee halted the trial because there was a clear benefit and asked for approval of the drug.

**Tegan Taylor:** So this is Pfizer reporting its own data, we haven't seen peer-reviewed versions of this data yet. But it's pretty exciting to think we've got vaccinations that slash the risk of hospitalisation, and here in Australia we are rocketing towards a good 90% of the population over 12 covered, we passed the 80% milestone for 16+ over the weekend, and now we've got these antiviral drugs that look like they might perform very well against it. Are we going to see in a couple of years that people just won't die from Covid anymore?

**Norman Swan:** You might, because in addition to that you've also got the monoclonal antibody drugs which also reduce severity of disease, and also can be used in people who are immunocompromised and might not get as good enough immune response to the vaccine.So there's a few things that have been spawned by this pandemic, and it's been very hard to develop good antiviral drugs outside HIV, so we've got very few. The anti-influenza drugs are really not very good. We've got good anti-herpes antivirals but they've got to be used early. So antivirals have been very difficult. And here we've got quite an effective antiviral. That's two now, there was the Merck product, the results were given a few weeks ago and we've ordered some doses of those for Australia. So this is great news in terms of treatment and breakthrough infections, particularly in the elderly.

**Tegan Taylor:** Well, that's all we've got time for on today's Coronacast, but if you've got questions or comments, send them to abc.net.au/coronacast.

**Norman Swan:** And we'll see you tomorrow.

**Tegan Taylor:** See you then.
