---
layout: post
title: "ABC TV: 7.30 Report - Vaccination protects against Covid-19 Multisystem Inflammatory Disorder in kids"
categories: vaccination
author:
- Norman Swan
- Tegan Taylor
---



**Transcript**

**DR NORMAN SWAN:** Because Australians over 16 have been vaccinated in such high numbers, the coronavirus has found its way into younger and younger age groups.
In Victoria the highest proportion of cases is now in the 0-9 age group. It's a similar story in New South Wales. Last month between 22 and 26 per cent of COVID cases were in children under 11.

**PROF. EMMA MCBRYDE, JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY:** The proportion of cases in younger age groups has increased but we've been very lucky just in the last few weeks that we haven't seen a surge in cases that was perhaps anticipated when children went back to school.

**NORMAN SWAN:** Even without that surge, today there were still at least 29 schools shut across New South Wales and Victoria due to COVID cases.

**EMMA MCBRYDE:** Children have very mild effects from COVID and we can vaccinate them, we should be vaccinating them and to be testing and shutting down schools because children have COVID just seems to be just adding more pain.

**NORMAN SWAN:** So, lockdown may be over, but keeping kids at home isn't.

While the vast majority of children who test positive won't get sick and end up in ICU, if the numbers increase substantially, there will be some children who will become quite unwell.

**A.J. HILTON, AMERICAN REPORTER:** The Tennessee Department of Health reported more than 7,500 cases in school aged kids.

**NORMAN SWAN:** That's what happened in the southern US state of Tennessee over the northern summer. When we last spoke to paediatric infectious disease specialist, Dr Ritu Banerjee in August, her hospital had just experienced its second childhood death due to COVID - a statistically rare event.

**DR RITU BANERJEE, VANDERBILT CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL:** In our children's hospital, we had at the peak of the Delta surge, over-flowed our paediatric ICU. We had to find extra bed space in other parts of the hospital to house all the COVID positive children who were hospitalised.

**NORMAN SWAN:** While that surge has now passed, doctors in the United States are still worried about COVID in children.

Dr Banerjee believes the recent emergency approval of a low dose Pfizer vaccine for 5 to 11-year-olds will significantly reduce the risks.

**RITU BANERJEE:** This is a vaccine preventable disease in children as well and so every child who gets infected or hospitalised or has an ICU stay, or, God forbid, dies, that's a vaccine preventable tragedy.

**PROF. NIGEL CURTIS, MURDOCH CHILDREN'S RESEARCH INSTITUTE:** We're in a very different situation to the USA where they're introducing vaccine in this age group as an emergency measure and the reason it's so different in the United States is that they have such low rates of vaccination in adults.

In Australia we're very different. We have got very high rates of adult vaccination, and we're approaching summer. So we can afford to wait.

**NORMAN SWAN:** Last week Professor Nigel Curtis published a paper with colleagues overseas arguing we should proceed with caution when it comes to vaccinating young kids.

**NIGEL CURTIS:** I think it's highly likely that ATAGI (Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation) will end up deciding to use this vaccine in this age group, but I think with coronavirus in this pandemic, we've really learned to expect the unexpected.

**NORMAN SWAN:** The main vaccine side-effect of concern is inflammation of the heart known as myocarditis. This has occurred in a small number of young men, mostly over the age of 17.

The relatively small vaccine trial among 5 to 11-year-olds in the US did not detect any myocarditis but even if it occurs at the same rate as young men, there are much greater risks of myocarditis in children who contract COVID itself and who later develop a rare multisystem inflammatory syndrome.

**RITU BANERJEE:** So many times families don't even know their child had been infected previously with COVID but many of these children who develop MIS-C (multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children) do develop myocarditis or dysfunction of the heart's ability to actually pump blood and so that leads sometimes to them requiring ICU hospitalisation.

**NORMAN SWAN:** Professor Emma McBryde is an epidemiologist and infectious disease modeller at James Cook University and has looked at the potential benefits of vaccinating young children.

**EMMA MCBRYDE:** We could, even with the Delta strain and the current vaccines, get very close to herd protection if we lower the age of vaccination to five-plus and that would achieve effectively very close to herd immunity in Australia.

**NIGEL CURTIS:** Because the risk of the actual disease in children is so much lower, the safety bar for a vaccine in this age group has to be much higher.

We need to be cautious because it may be that their immune response to the vaccine is different. We're simply saying to take the same approach as we have done with every other vaccine and look at the data and make sure the benefits outweigh the risks.

**NORMAN SWAN:** Today's announcement that the kid's vaccine won't be available until the New Year will allow us to learn from the US experience, so that when the time comes, parents can be sure they're making the right decision.

**RITU BANERJEE:** The data showed that the vaccine is very effective and very safe in the 5 to 11-year-olds and very comparable to the efficacy that we've seen in 12 years and over.

If you can reduce the number of people who are actually infected and contagious, you can reduce spread and you can end this pandemic and then, you can get back to normal life.
